splay for communication , e.g . of a personal digital assistant ( pda ) or phone , is positioned ne
and undertakes no maintenance . as a result , digital maps become progressively outdated.applicabil
and undertakes no maintenance . as a result , digital maps become progressively outdated.applicabil
velling . examples : mobile phones , personal digital assistants ( pda ) . point of sale ( pos ) : 
hanical domestic appliances of heading 8509 ; digital cameras of heading 8525 ; ( g ) radiators for
 and microphones ; ( 4 ) television cameras , digital cameras and video camera recorders ; ( 5 ) mo
anically align optical fibres end to end in a digital line system . they perform no other function 
e 8519 81 21 – – – – – – with an analogue and digital reading system 6,8 ( 175 ) p/st 8519 81 25 – 
 for laser reading systems 8523 49 10 – – – – digital versatile discs ( dvd ) free p/st 8523 49 20 
 reproducing apparatus ; television cameras , digital cameras and video camera recorders 8525 50 00
atus free p/st 8525 80 – television cameras , digital cameras and video camera recorders – – televi
9 – – – other 4,1 ( 181 ) p/st 8525 80 30 – – digital cameras free p/st – – video camera recorders 
players 8527 12 10 – – – with an analogue and digital reading system free p/st 8527 12 90 – – – oth
– – of the cassette-type with an analogue and digital reading system 10,5 ( 182 ) p/st 8527 13 99 –
ratus – – – capable of receiving and decoding digital radio data system signals 8527 21 20 – – – – 
– – of the cassette-type with an analogue and digital reading system 12,3 ( 185 ) p/st 8527 21 59 –
– – of the cassette-type with an analogue and digital reading system 14 p/st 8527 21 98 – – – – – o
– – of the cassette-type with an analogue and digital reading system 10,5 ( 182 ) p/st 8527 91 19 –
– – of the cassette-type with an analogue and digital reading system free p/st 8527 91 99 – – – – –
eo game consoles 2,8 ( 170 ) — 8543 70 04 – – digital flight-data recorders 2,8 ( 170 ) — 8543 70 0
ge or audio file 2,8 ( 170 ) — 8543 70 06 – – digital signal processing apparatus capable of connec
heads ( heading 8522 ) ; television cameras , digital cameras and video camera recorders ( heading 
9207 10 10 – – organs 3,2 p/st 9207 10 30 – – digital pianos 3,2 p/st 9207 10 50 – – synthesisers 3
ilar articles 9620 00 10 – of a kind used for digital , photographic or video cameras , cinematogra
facilitated by , where appropriate , emerging digital technologies such as computational models and
as part of its regulatory tasks , make use of digital infrastructures or it tools in order to facil
( iot ) an extremely high number of connected digital devices are expected to be deployed across th
and ict processes , which undermines trust in digital solutions . network and information systems a
 . they are the cornerstone for achieving the digital single market . ( 3 ) increased digitisation 
formation systems , communications networks , digital products , services and devices used by citiz
ver , given that incidents undermine trust in digital service providers and in the digital single m
trust in digital service providers and in the digital single market itself , especially among consu
ensure cybersecurity and to increase trust in digital technologies . in 2013 , the cybersecurity st
nancial market infrastructures , healthcare , digital infrastructure as well as key digital service
hcare , digital infrastructure as well as key digital service providers ( search engines , cloud co
ibute to a high level of cybersecurity in the digital single market.12 ) ( 16 ) since the adoption 
 the ecosystem of organisations defending the digital ecosystem of the union , allowing enisa to ef
nt , ‘ train the trainers ’ , building on the digital competence framework for citizens with a view
6/1148 and those used by the providers of the digital services listed in annex iii to that directiv
hould furthermore organise , in line with the digital education action plan established in the comm
ote safer online behaviour by individuals and digital literacy , to raise awareness of potential cy
rocesses , thereby strengthening trust in the digital internal market and its competitiveness . ( 4
ices , and including , in particular , smes , digital service providers , european and internationa
oducts , ict services and ict processes . the digital single market , and in particular the data ec
 mid-term review on the implementation of the digital single market strategy – a connected digital 
 digital single market strategy – a connected digital single market for all , the commission highli
educe costs for undertakings operating in the digital single market . the european cybersecurity ce
cle 4 of directive ( eu ) 2016/1148 ; ( 5 ) ‘ digital service provider ’ means a digital service pr
 ; ( 5 ) ‘ digital service provider ’ means a digital service provider as defined in point ( 6 ) of
rocesses , thereby strengthening trust in the digital internal market and its competitiveness . 7. 
ments for operators of essential services and digital service providers , as well as regarding alre
6/1148 and those used by the providers of the digital services listed in annex iii to that directiv
ification schemes , with a view to creating a digital single market for ict products , ict services
les between computer and other devices ( from digital camera or from/to mobile phone , mp3/mp4 play
orm modules as used in trusted computing , or digital tachograph cards ) . the second technical dom
ation application ; ( c ) for the category of digital tachographs : ( 1 ) digital tachograph - tach
r the category of digital tachographs : ( 1 ) digital tachograph - tachograph card , as referred in
gulation ( eu ) 165/2014 ( annex 1c ) ; ( 2 ) digital tachograph - vehicle unit as referred in anne
 installed in road transport vehicles ; ( 3 ) digital tachograph - external gnss facility ( egf pp 
uropean parliament and of the council ; ( 4 ) digital tachograph - motion sensor ( ms pp ) as refer
gy ( , which calls for actions to develop the digital society , including the deployment of broadba
h the union legislation . as indicated in the digital agenda for the western balkans 3 ) ( , a clos
f working document , measures in support of a digital agenda for the western balkans.4 ) annex term
pment and support innovation.2 ) ( 2 ) in the digital society standardisation deliverables become i
 e-commerce provides the data required by the digital compass for the eu ’ s digital decade to moni
equired by the digital compass for the eu ’ s digital decade to monitor the eu ’ s digital targets 
e eu ’ s digital decade to monitor the eu ’ s digital targets for 2030 , such as the digital intens
eu ’ s digital targets for 2030 , such as the digital intensity indicator reflecting the digital tr
he digital intensity indicator reflecting the digital transformation of businesses . it also provid
us other union policies related to europe ’ s digital performance and to the priority of the europe
he european commission – a europe fit for the digital age . ( 2 ) to be able to assess the quality 
s calendar year , — use of website , — use of digital signature in any message sent , i.e . using e
ng distribution channels , etc . ) , — use of digital signature in any message sent , i.e . using e
gy ( , which calls for actions to develop the digital society , including the deployment of broadba
h the union legislation . as indicated in the digital agenda for the western balkans 3 ) ( , a clos
f working document , measures in support of a digital agenda for the western balkans.4 ) annex term
modify and/or ( re ) distribute it ) — use of digital signature in any message sent , i.e . using e
o 27001 , in order to address the security of digital information and data . these standards may no
 ) ; drinking water supply and distribution ; digital infrastructure ; and any other sector which i
uant to a programme , automatically processes digital data , as well as digital data stored , proce
matically processes digital data , as well as digital data stored , processed , retrieved or transm
tioning of an information system by inputting digital data , by transmitting , damaging , deleting 
ing , deteriorating , altering or suppressing digital data on an information system , or rendering 
technical means , non-public transmissions of digital data to , from or within an information syste
ions from an information system carrying such digital data . 8. for the purposes of this regulation
mmunications , rich and diverse content , and digital services . ( 3 ) the community legislative fr
lative framework addressing the challenges of digital content in the information society includes p
miliation via the internet and/or interactive digital technologies , including mobile phones . ( 6 
l information on the transport network . this digital network graph can be enhanced to be used as a
 13 ) ( , co-cities project 14 ) ( , european digital traffic infrastructure network for intelligen
thus , inter alia , continuing to address the digital divide ; — to encourage measures , such as e-
earch for practical solutions in the field of digital rights management ; — to support the emergenc
 improving basic skills , particularly it and digital skills is a top priority for the union. < /p 
al use of ict , given the need to develop the digital culture as one essential element in the teach
 to encourage the development of high-quality digital teaching and learning materials to ensure qua
pment and support innovation.2 ) ( 2 ) in the digital society standardisation deliverables become i
the prevention and combating of piracy in the digital environment ( ; 8 ) 6. considering its conclu
 a european approach to media literacy in the digital environment ( and its conclusions of 27 novem
 of 27 november 2009 on media literacy in the digital environment9 ) ( ; 10 ) 7. considering direct
al and creative goods in a rapidly developing digital environment is damaging the legal marketing o
gy ( , which calls for actions to develop the digital society , including the deployment of broadba
h the union legislation . as indicated in the digital agenda for the western balkans 3 ) ( , a clos
f working document , measures in support of a digital agenda for the western balkans.4 ) annex term
lead to social exclusion or a widening of the digital divide ; however , digital literacy is a prec
 a widening of the digital divide ; however , digital literacy is a precondition for inclusion and 
u ) 2015/2366 and ( eu ) 2016/2341 as regards digital operational resilience for the financial sect
eds to adequately and comprehensively address digital risks to all financial entities stemming from
buting to the realisation of the potential of digital finance , in terms of boosting innovation and
ovation and promoting competition in a secure digital environment . ( 2 ) financial entities are he
al entities are heavily reliant on the use of digital technologies in their daily business . it is 
to ensure the operational resilience of their digital operations against ict risk . this need has b
 market , in particular technologies enabling digital representations of value or of rights to be t
accordance with those directives , of various digital operational resilience requirements that are 
 entities , in line with the new framework on digital operational resilience , the scope of the sre
ed incident reports and by the results of the digital operational resilience testing performed by f
in accordance with that regulation.13 ) ( 5 ) digital operational resilience is essential to preser
istent implementation of the new framework on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ng point is added : ‘ ( d ) risks revealed by digital operational resilience testing in accordance 
ther functions so as to ensure continuity and digital operational resilience upon the failure of th
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ted : ‘ ( 14a ) the results of institutions ’ digital operational resilience testing under regulati
he following point is inserted : ‘ ( 4a ) the digital operational resilience of the network and inf
t-related incident reports and the results of digital operational resilience testing under regulati
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
capacity , except the requirements related to digital operational resilience ; ’ ; ( ii ) point ( g
ppropriate testing of algorithms , other than digital operational resilience testing , so as to ens
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
hall indicate how they ensure a high level of digital operational resilience in accordance with cha
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
its communication or 6 may 2015 setting out a digital single market strategy for europe , the commi
o and consumer radio receivers , and consumer digital television equipment.12 ) ( 9 ) in order to a
ve 2014/53/eu and consumer equipment used for digital television , in order to facilitate access fo
ormally in exchange for remuneration . in the digital economy , market participants increasingly co
ummarise relevant indicators on the union ’ s digital performance and track the evolution of member
e and track the evolution of member states in digital competitiveness , such as the digital economy
ates in digital competitiveness , such as the digital economy and society index , and , where neces
ves of the regulatory framework , for example digital television as a means for increasing radio sp
e to any undertaking.25 ) ( 63 ) bridging the digital divide in the union is essential to enable al
 the union to have access to the internet and digital services . to that end , in the case of speci
 severely impacting on the development of the digital single market . member states should take all
union . such measures will promote innovative digital services and ensure long-term socioeconomic b
nsure not only accessibility for end-users to digital radio and television broadcast services but a
 diversity and media pluralism in the area of digital television . technological and market develop
sure accessibility for end-users to specified digital broadcasting services . member states should 
. member states should be able to specify the digital broadcasting services to which access by end-
igations in relation to conditional access to digital broadcasting services in order to assess thro
ndling , and access products for providers of digital television and radio services , can be better
t provides the basis for participation in the digital economy and society through essential online 
 of social inclusion and participation in the digital economy and society in their territory . the 
ervices and so actively to participate in the digital society . ensuring such connections on the ba
g terminal equipment , other services such as digital content or digital services , and electronic 
t , other services such as digital content or digital services , and electronic communications serv
s for the sales of goods or for the supply of digital content . however , a right to terminate any 
of radio in new vehicles of category m and of digital television . member states should be able to 
g and reproducing radio services provided via digital terrestrial radio broadcasting or via ip netw
 achieve the fullest connectivity possible to digital television sets . interoperability is an evol
nt to ensure that connectors are available on digital television sets that are capable of passing a
le of passing all the necessary elements of a digital signal , including the audio and video stream
ates from imposing obligations to ensure that digital radio receivers are capable of receiving and 
rom adopting technical regulations related to digital terrestrial television equipment , to prepare
ailable of such a network ; ( 17 ) ‘ enhanced digital television equipment ’ means set-top boxes in
r connection to television sets or integrated digital television sets , able to receive digital int
ted digital television sets , able to receive digital interactive television services ; ( 18 ) ‘ ap
providers , and the resources in the enhanced digital television equipment for digital television a
the enhanced digital television equipment for digital television and radio services ; ( 19 ) ‘ radi
ng ; access to conditional access systems for digital television services and access to virtual net
sary to ensure accessibility for end-users to digital radio and television broadcasting services an
ii apply in relation to conditional access to digital television and radio services broadcast to vi
y such amendment or withdrawal : ( i ) retail digital television and radio broadcasting services ; 
dio and consumer radio receivers and consumer digital television equipment 1. member states shall e
erability of car radio receivers and consumer digital television equipment in accordance with annex
3. member states shall encourage providers of digital television services to ensure , where appropr
ices to ensure , where appropriate , that the digital television equipment that they provide to the
le so that , where technically feasible , the digital television equipment is reusable with other p
equipment is reusable with other providers of digital television services . without prejudice to ar
 end-users have the possibility to return the digital television equipment through a free and easy 
rates that it is fully interoperable with the digital television services of other providers , incl
those to which the end-user has switched.47 ) digital television equipment which complies with harm
ntry code . annex ii conditions for access to digital television and radio services broadcast to vi
62 ( 1 ) in relation to conditional access to digital television and radio services broadcast to vi
ansmission , which provide access services to digital television and radio services and the access 
erability of car radio receivers and consumer digital television equipment referred to in article 1
sumer equipment intended for the reception of digital television signals ( namely , broadcasting vi
ilable in the union , capable of descrambling digital television signals , is to possess the capabi
nt rental agreement . 2. interoperability for digital television sets any digital television set wi
eroperability for digital television sets any digital television set with an integral screen of vis
, and able to pass all relevant elements of a digital television signal , including information rel
roducing at least radio services provided via digital terrestrial radio broadcasting . receivers wh
 services , identification via eid e.g . on a digital marketplace , [ national examples ] ) ( if ap
app for private purposes in the last 3 months digital skills cxfer1 activities carried out in the l
ant messaging , usb , cable ) or on the cloud digital skills cinsapp1 activities carried out in the
ng downloading or installing software or apps digital skills cconf1 activities carried out in the l
ours , contrast , text size , toolbars/menu ) digital skills cwrd1 software related activities carr
oses involving using word processing software digital skills cpres2 software related activities car
 picture , table , chart , animation or sound digital skills cxls1 software related activities carr
purposes involving using spreadsheet software digital skills cxlsadv1 software related activities c
organise , analyse , structure or modify data digital skills cepva1 software related activities car
volving editing photos , video or audio files digital skills cprg2 software related activities carr
olving writing code in a programming language digital skills udi information or content ( such as v
ubtful by the respondent in the last 3 months digital skills tic truthfulness of the information or
ia checked by respondent in the last 3 months digital skills ticcsfoi truthfulness of the informati
 on the internet ( such as other news sites ) digital skills ticidis truthfulness of the informatio
ion on the internet regarding the information digital skills ticnidis truthfulness of the informati
 persons or using sources not on the internet digital skills ticxnd truthfulness of information or 
ormation , content or source was not reliable digital skills ticxskl truthfulness of information or
espondent lacked skills or knowledge to do so digital skills ticxoth truthfulness of information or
internet not checked because of other reasons digital skills hm ( optional ) messages encountered o
ding in the comments ’ section ) ( optional ) digital skills hmps ( optional ) groups of people or 
use of political or social views ( optional ) digital skills hmso ( optional ) groups of people or 
rientation ( lgbtiq identities ) ( optional ) digital skills hmse ( optional ) groups of people or 
tile or degrading because of sex ( optional ) digital skills hmre ( optional ) groups of people or 
cause of racial or ethnic origin ( optional ) digital skills hmrb ( optional ) groups of people or 
ng because of religion or belief ( optional ) digital skills hmd ( optional ) groups of people or i
 degrading because of disability ( optional ) digital skills hmoth ( optional ) groups of people or
splay for communication , e.g . of a personal digital assistant ( pda ) or phone , is positioned ne
s and undertakes no maintenance . as a result digital maps become progressively out-dated.applicabi
s and undertakes no maintenance . as a result digital maps become progressively out-dated.applicabi
ravelling.examples : mobile phones , personal digital assistants ( pda ) point-of-sale ( pos ) : ac
ecause of other barriers to internet commerce digital skills cxfer1 activities carried out in the l
ant messaging , usb , cable ) or on the cloud digital skills cinsapp1 activities carried out in the
ng downloading or installing software or apps digital skills cconf1 activities carried out in the l
ours , contrast , text size , toolbars/menu ) digital skills cwrd1 software-related activities carr
oses involving using word-processing software digital skills cpres2 software-related activities car
 picture , table , chart , animation or sound digital skills cxls1 software-related activities carr
purposes involving using spreadsheet software digital skills cxlsadv1 software-related activities c
organise , analyse , structure or modify data digital skills cepva1 software-related activities car
volving editing photos , video or audio files digital skills cprg2 software-related activities carr
olving writing code in a programming language digital skills udi information or content ( such as v
r doubtful by respondent in the last 3 months digital skills tic truthfulness of the information or
hecked by the respondent in the last 3 months digital skills ticcsfoi truthfulness of the informati
 or finding other information on the internet digital skills ticidis truthfulness of the informatio
ion on the internet regarding the information digital skills ticnidis truthfulness of the informati
 persons or using sources not on the internet digital skills ticxnd truthfulness of information or 
ormation , content or source was not reliable digital skills ticxskl truthfulness of information or
espondent lacked skills or knowledge to do so digital skills ticxoth truthfulness of information or
gy ( , which calls for actions to develop the digital society , including the deployment of broadba
h the union legislation . as indicated in the digital agenda for the western balkans 3 ) ( , a clos
f working document , measures in support of a digital agenda for the western balkans.4 ) annex term
rt innovation.2 ) ( 2 ) the completion of the digital single market is a key priority for the europ
 ( . the commission in its communication on a digital single market strategy for europe3 ) ( highli
n and interoperability in creating a european digital economy with a long-term growth potential.4 )
a long-term growth potential.4 ) ( 3 ) in the digital society standardisation deliverables become i
8 ) xbrl 2.1 is a technical specification for digital business reporting , managed by a global not 
communications on the single market ( and the digital single market 3 ) ( confirm the relevance of 
ility of networks and systems in the european digital economy . this is reinforced with the adoptio
 considered critical to the completion of the digital single market.5 ) ( 3 ) the communication fro
l of 28 october 2015.3 ) ( communication on a digital single market strategy for europe . com ( 201
ions on the eu cybersecurity strategy for the digital decade . therein , the council recalled that 
for the completion of single market ( and the digital single market2 ) ( where the role of standard
n and interoperability in creating a european digital economy is reinforced with the adoption of th
ion on ict standardisation priorities for the digital single market3 ) ( setting out a comprehensiv
es that are critical to the completion of the digital single market.4 ) ( 3 ) in the digital societ
of the digital single market.4 ) ( 3 ) in the digital society standardisation deliverables become i
l of 28 october 2015.2 ) ( communication on a digital single market strategy for europe . com ( 201
 its communication of 6 may 2015 entitled ‘ a digital single market strategy for europe ’ , the com
 the creation of the right conditions for the digital single market . those include the deployment 
d creating a level playing field for advanced digital networks and innovative services . that commu
ution of 19 january 2016 entitled ‘ towards a digital single market act ’ , the european parliament
ent called on the commission to integrate the digital single market further by ensuring that a more
 any issue concerning the overall dynamics of digital markets or with regard to their relationship 
f their institutional structure in a changing digital environment . if , as the outcome of that eva
vides an approach to the delivery of european digital public services commonly agreed by the member
ecision of 13 september 2018 setting up the ‘ digital transport and logistics forum ’ , is importan
 . to that end , and in accordance with the ‘ digital by default ’ principle mentioned in the commi
ment action plan 2016–2020 – accelerating the digital transformation of government ’ , the use of e
 ) ; drinking water supply and distribution ; digital infrastructure ; and any other sector which i
uant to a programme , automatically processes digital data , as well as digital data stored , proce
matically processes digital data , as well as digital data stored , processed , retrieved or transm
tioning of an information system by inputting digital data , by transmitting , damaging , deleting 
ing , deteriorating , altering or suppressing digital data on an information system , or rendering 
technical means , non-public transmissions of digital data to , from or within an information syste
ions from an information system carrying such digital data . article 3 the factors determining whet
needs ; ( c ) foster the acquisition of basic digital competences by young people so as to ensure t
ing a multiannual community programme to make digital content in europe more accessible , usable an
een set in europe to exploit the potential of digital content . ( 3 ) the conclusions of the europe
nd 24 march 2000 stressed that the shift to a digital , knowledge-based economy , prompted by new g
mation society . ( 5 ) the demand for quality digital content in europe , with balanced access and 
nowledge , or ‘ re‐users ’ wishing to exploit digital content resources to create services , is inc
e services , is increasingly apparent . ( 6 ) digital content stakeholders are content providers ( 
and institutions that create , collect or own digital content ) and content users ( including organ
 are end-users that reuse and/or add value to digital content ) . particular attention should be gi
 favoured the development and use of european digital content on the internet and the linguistic di
ental to accessing and using and distributing digital content . this is particularly relevant to th
 services based on access to , and reuse of , digital content . ( 10 ) a legislative framework has 
s been defined to deal with the challenges of digital content in the information society ( 4 ) ( 5 
formation in the community . ( 12 ) where the digital content involves personal data , directives 9
the proposed action , namely aiming at making digital content in europe more accessible , usable an
programme for the period 2005 to 2008 to make digital content in europe more accessible , usable an
a ) facilitating at community level access to digital content , its use and exploitation ; ( b ) fa
uality and enhancing best practice related to digital content between content providers and users ,
ctors ; ( c ) reinforcing cooperation between digital content stakeholders and awareness . the acti
inge upon the development and use of european digital content and the promotion of linguistic diver
on econtentplus has the overall aim of making digital content in europe more accessible , usable an
 better conditions for accessing and managing digital content and services in multilingual and mult
w ways of interacting with knowledge-enhanced digital content , a feature which is becoming essenti
he way for a structured framework for quality digital content in europe — the european digital cont
lity digital content in europe — the european digital content area — by facilitating transfer of ex
a ) facilitating at community level access to digital content , its use and exploitation ; ( b ) fa
uality and enhancing best practice related to digital content between content providers and users ,
ctors ; ( c ) reinforcing cooperation between digital content stakeholders and awareness . ii . lin
 a. facilitating at community level access to digital content , its use and exploitation the activi
iferation of open european knowledge pools of digital objects , for education and research communit
tion of trans-european brokering services for digital learning content , with associated business m
process of definition of global standards for digital learning content ; ( d ) promoting the emerge
for accessing and using high quality european digital cultural and scientific resources through the
ion and collection building , preservation of digital objects and inventories of cultural and scien
ts and inventories of cultural and scientific digital resources . they should improve access to dig
tal resources . they should improve access to digital cultural and scientific assets through effect
uality and enhancing best practice related to digital content between content providers and users ,
ess in the creation , use and distribution of digital content . these activities encompass experime
ility , composability and interoperability of digital content within the context of the existing le
vities will exploit the benefits of enhancing digital content with machine‐understandable data ( se
re public sector information , spatial data , digital learning and cultural content , as well as sc
content , as well as scientific and scholarly digital content . c. reinforcing cooperation between 
 content . c. reinforcing cooperation between digital content stakeholders and awareness the activi
accompanying relevant legislation relating to digital content , and fostering increased collaborati
and fostering increased collaboration between digital content stakeholders , as well as awareness b
 1. facilitating at community level access to digital content , its use and exploitation 40 to 50 %
uality and enhancing best practice related to digital content between content providers and users ,
45 to 55 % 3. reinforcing cooperation between digital content stakeholders and awareness 8 to 12 % 
on society , promotes an open and competitive digital economy in the european union , emphasises ic
 introduction of public pan-european cellular digital land-based mobile communications in the commu
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ative procedure ( ,3 ) whereas : ( 1 ) in the digital age , information and communication technolog
ctivities of union financial entities , their digital resilience has yet to be better addressed and
om cash and paper-based methods to the use of digital solutions , as well as securities clearing an
services online operating with insurtech , to digital insurance underwriting . finance has not only
writing . finance has not only become largely digital throughout the whole sector , but digitalisat
ndard-setting bodies in an attempt to enhance digital resilience , set standards and coordinate reg
duct perspectives . although ict security and digital resilience are part of operational risk , the
 to strengthen , in a proportionate way , the digital operational resilience of the financial servi
pervision . nonetheless , provisions tackling digital operational resilience and ict security are n
et fully or consistently harmonised , despite digital operational resilience being vital for ensuri
nancial stability and market integrity in the digital age , and no less important than , for exampl
n should therefore be developed to also cover digital operational resilience , by strengthening the
harmonisation has been very limited , such as digital operational resilience testing , or absent , 
 , such as ict-related incident reporting and digital operational resilience testing , and inconsis
risk framework , further harmonisation of key digital operational resilience requirements for all f
 ict-related incidents , or for reporting and digital testing capabilities . those acts were primar
rules on ict risk , all provisions addressing digital risk in the financial sector should for the f
and infrastructures , which entails increased digital risk . observing basic cyber hygiene should a
e establishment of a common framework for the digital operational resilience of financial entities 
ses the level of harmonisation of the various digital resilience components , by introducing requir
 ) given the strong interlinkages between the digital resilience and the physical resilience of fin
mputing service providers are one category of digital infrastructure covered by directive ( eu ) 20
f a union horizontal framework establishing a digital oversight authority . ( 21 ) in order to main
ll as for managing ict third-party risk . the digital operational resilience baseline for financial
al system , service users or clients . ( 25 ) digital operational resilience testing requirements h
akes the mutual recognition of the results of digital operational resilience testing complex which 
nancial sector . without union intervention , digital operational resilience testing would continue
heir need to adapt to an emerging competitive digital global economy , to boost their business effi
) ( 35 ) in order to maintain a high level of digital operational resilience for the whole financia
e understood in a broad manner , encompassing digital and data services provided through ict system
d by this regulation , the application of the digital operational resilience rules should take into
l developments , to establish a comprehensive digital operational resilience testing programme as a
enefit from a more flexible regime as regards digital operational resilience testing programmes . w
y balance the objective of maintaining a high digital operational resilience , the available resour
s identified for the purposes of the advanced digital resilience testing should be required to cond
ict risk management framework and the overall digital operational resilience strategy . the approac
e financial entity to achieve a high level of digital operational resilience . ( 47 ) inspired by r
 . ( 56 ) in order to achieve a high level of digital operational resilience , and in line with bot
 perspective to reasonably carry it out . the digital operational resilience testing required by th
r financial entities . at the same time , the digital operational resilience testing by means of tl
out adverse effects on a financial entity ’ s digital operational resilience , several key contract
 of a financial entity ’ s need to secure its digital resilience because it is deeply dependent on 
cial sector , as well as to strengthening the digital operational resilience of financial entities 
 of this regulation specifically dealing with digital operational resilience in the financial secto
 and lack of cross-border impact . ( 79 ) the digital transformation experienced in financial servi
n relation to the monitoring of the impact of digital operational risks posed by systemic ict third
toring of ict third-party service providers ’ digital risk-management , the esas should be encourag
o this regulation all provisions covering the digital operational resilience aspects which today ar
y addressed at union level through harmonised digital resilience rules . to that effect , the commi
 market practices , draw inspiration from the digital operational resilience requirements laid down
egulation , namely to achieve a high level of digital operational resilience for regulated financia
1. in order to achieve a high common level of digital operational resilience , this regulation lays
icle 2 ( 1 ) , points ( a ) to ( d ) ; ( iv ) digital operational resilience testing ; ( v ) inform
e following definitions shall apply : ( 1 ) ‘ digital operational resilience ’ means the ability of
 services by producing adverse effects in the digital or physical environment ; ( 6 ) ‘ information
ip or control ; ( 21 ) ‘ ict services ’ means digital and data services provided through ict system
6 ( 4 ) , in order to achieve a high level of digital operational resilience . 2. the management bo
 responsibility for setting and approving the digital operational resilience strategy as referred t
ate budget to fulfil the financial entity ’ s digital operational resilience needs in respect of al
elevant ict security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience training referred to i
comprehensively and to ensure a high level of digital operational resilience . 2. the ict risk mana
ructions or conclusions derived from relevant digital operational resilience testing or audit proce
ict risk management framework shall include a digital operational resilience strategy setting out h
work shall be implemented . to that end , the digital operational resilience strategy shall include
ection from it ; ( f ) evidencing the current digital operational resilience situation on the basis
s of preventive measures ; ( g ) implementing digital operational resilience testing , in accordanc
inancial entities may , in the context of the digital operational resilience strategy referred to i
e the impact they are likely to have on their digital operational resilience . 2. financial entitie
l communication . 3. lessons derived from the digital operational resilience testing carried out in
 effectiveness of the implementation of their digital operational resilience strategy set out in ar
develop ict security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience training as compulsory
technologies on ict security requirements and digital operational resilience . they shall keep up-t
ofile , ict security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience training for staff and
nd electronic money institutions . chapter iv digital operational resilience testing article 24 gen
4 general requirements for the performance of digital operational resilience testing 1. for the pur
tifying weaknesses , deficiencies and gaps in digital operational resilience , and of promptly impl
maintain and review a sound and comprehensive digital operational resilience testing programme as a
t framework referred to in article 6 . 2. the digital operational resilience testing programme shal
h articles 25 and 26 . 3. when conducting the digital operational resilience testing programme refe
le 25 testing of ict tools and systems 1. the digital operational resilience testing programme refe
usiness needs and objectives set out in their digital resilience strategy . 2. where the contractua
ities ’ ict security awareness programmes and digital operational resilience training in accordance
promote coordination measures to increase the digital operational resilience of financial entities 
s of their expertise in financial stability , digital operational resilience and ict security matte
n order to avoid detrimental effects on their digital operational resilience and to allow them to d
elligence sharing : ( a ) aims to enhance the digital operational resilience of financial entities 
statutory auditors and audit firms as regards digital operational resilience , by means of the incl
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ent and of the council of 14 december 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sect
u ) 2015/2366 and ( eu ) 2016/2341 as regards digital operational resilience for the financial sect
ces , identification via eid for example on a digital marketplace , [ national examples ] ) ( if ap
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cxfer1 activities carried out in the l
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cinsapp1 activities carried out in the
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cconf1 activities carried out in the l
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cwrd1 software related activities carr
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cpres2 software related activities car
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cxls1 software related activities carr
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cxlsadv1 software related activities c
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cepva1 software related activities car
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cprg2 software related activities carr
licable 06. information society participation digital skills udi information or content ( such as v
licable 06. information society participation digital skills tic truthfulness of the information or
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticcsfoi truthfulness of the informati
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticidis truthfulness of the informatio
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticnidis truthfulness of the informati
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticxnd truthfulness of information or 
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticxskl truthfulness of information or
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticxoth truthfulness of information or
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hm ( optional ) messages encountered o
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hmps ( optional ) groups of people or 
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hmso ( optional ) groups of people or 
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hmse ( optional ) groups of people or 
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hmre ( optional ) groups of people or 
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hmrb ( optional ) groups of people or 
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hmd ( optional ) groups of people or i
licable 06. information society participation digital skills hmoth ( optional ) groups of people or
gy ( , which calls for actions to develop the digital society , including the deployment of broadba
h the union legislation . as indicated in the digital agenda for the western balkans 3 ) ( , a clos
f working document , measures in support of a digital agenda for the western balkans.4 ) annex term
 traffic and transport services data used for digital maps accurate and available , where possible 
 accurate and available , where possible , to digital map producers and service providers , based o
ty of existing road and traffic data used for digital maps to digital map producers and service pro
oad and traffic data used for digital maps to digital map producers and service providers , — the f
 authorities and stakeholders and the private digital map producers and service providers , — the t
 timely updating of road and traffic data for digital maps by the relevant public authorities and s
d stakeholders , — the timely updating of the digital maps by the digital map producers and service
he timely updating of the digital maps by the digital map producers and service providers . 4. spec
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cxfer1 activities carried out in the l
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cinsapp1 activities carried out in the
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cconf1 activities carried out in the l
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cwrd1 software related activities carr
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cpres2 software related activities car
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cxls1 software related activities carr
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cxlsadv1 software related activities c
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cepva1 software related activities car
licable 06. information society participation digital skills cprg2 software related activities carr
licable 06. information society participation digital skills udi information or content ( such as v
licable 06. information society participation digital skills tic truthfulness of the information or
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticcsfoi truthfulness of the informati
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticidis truthfulness of the informatio
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticnidis truthfulness of the informati
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticxnd truthfulness of information or 
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticxskl truthfulness of information or
licable 06. information society participation digital skills ticxoth truthfulness of information or
for the completion of single market ( and the digital single market2 ) ( where the role of standard
n and interoperability in creating a european digital economy is reinforced with the adoption of th
ion on ict standardisation priorities for the digital single market3 ) ( setting out a comprehensiv
es that are critical to the completion of the digital single market.4 ) ( 3 ) in the digital societ
of the digital single market.4 ) ( 3 ) in the digital society standardisation deliverables become i
a , allowing them to be sent securely — using digital certificates and encryption — over the intern
l of 28 october 2015.2 ) ( communication on a digital single market strategy for europe . com ( 201
 mid-term review on the implementation of the digital single market strategy com ( 2017 ) 228 final
its communication of 19 may 2010 entitled ' a digital agenda for europe ' , the commission proposed
 receiving , — use of advanced e-signatures ( digital signatures ) . characteristics to be collecte
ing the production of up-to-date and accurate digital maps that are a key asset for reliable its ap
key asset for reliable its applications . the digital map producers should be encouraged to integra
ould be able to request service providers and digital map producers to correct inaccuracies in thei
ime traffic information service providers and digital map producers through a national or common ac
ties , road operators , service providers and digital map producers to successfully and cost-effici
ta by the road authorities , road operators , digital map producers and service providers . to that
mitted by road authorities , road operators , digital map producers and service providers . ( 22 ) 
es , road operators , service providers , and digital map producers ; ( 16 ) ‘ end-user ’ means any
on services ; ( 17 ) ‘ access point ’ means a digital interface where the static road data , dynami
ties and road operators , in cooperation with digital map producers and service providers , shall e
 be accessible for exchange and re-use by any digital map producer or service provider within the u
3 ; ( d ) road authorities , road operators , digital map producers and service providers using the
e these updates to users in advance . 3. when digital map producers and service providers use stati
th by the road authorities , road operators , digital map producers and service providers in accord
 from the road authorities , road operators , digital map producers and service providers the follo
 a description of the road and traffic data , digital map or real-time traffic information services
se short-term data need not to be included in digital map updates as they shall not be considered a
rt innovation.2 ) ( 2 ) the completion of the digital single market is a key priority for the europ
tegy 2015 ( . the commission has launched the digital single market strategy3 ) ( where the role of
n and interoperability in creating a european digital economy with a long-term growth potential is 
wth potential is highlighted.4 ) ( 3 ) in the digital society standardisation deliverables become i
mmittee and the committee of the regions on a digital single market strategy for europe com ( 2015 
onal and local authorities , make use of open digital platforms to facilitate an integrated approac
oviding open access to a wide range of public digital resources and public data . ( 16 ) through th
gy ( , which calls for actions to develop the digital society , including the deployment of broadba
h the union legislation . as indicated in the digital agenda for the western balkans 3 ) ( , a clos
f working document , measures in support of a digital agenda for the western balkans.4 ) annex term
